---
layout: post
author: Chris
title: Notes on Pragmatism Talk by Ultralight Backpackers
---

I think of myself as a backpacker.  Maybe even an ultralight backpacker.  A semi-ultralight backpacker.  Yes, I started down the ultralight road for a while after my return from fieldwork.  But with time, and more experience, I found that my preferences ran counter to a strict ultralight approach.  My National Outdoor Leadership School experience clashed with minimizing every last ounce.  Slimming down my medkit, for instance, never seemed too interesting to me.  Redundancies like an extra plastic spoon or tops for water bottles (which weigh little but provide peace of mind) always had a place in my pack. ([^1]:)  And then there are just the personal sundries such as a nice camera to memorialize my journeys.  Carrying a hammock instead of a minimal ground shelter, for example, has limited my ability to go *really* light.  

Over time, I've added weight back in.  From what I've read this process of slimming down to a lower bound and then coming back up is not uncommon or even looked down upon.  Beyond personal preferences, this re-weighting process has been partly imposed by changing external constraints.  I can't use an alcohol stove in Western forests with burn bans, for example.  But I think I've found my personal point of balance between shedding weight and the gear that I take for extra security or comfort.  In summer, for the Cascades at any rate, I seem to average around 17 pounds for my pack "base weight" (this term varies but commonly refers to everything you carry except consumables).

I still follow the ultralight communities online, and as I scroll online through endless posts I imagine our audience constitutes a pretty narrow slice of the internet.  Ultralight backpackers minimize the weight of what they carry, which means gear takes heightened role in the rationale for these sites and content they put out.  As part of our scrutiny of ounces and grams, discussions on ultralight forums take on an especially pragmatic tone, one that mixes an economy of weight with perspectives on function.  This pragmatism almost seems to act as an article of faith among discussants.  I keep coming back to these forums for discussion about gear, so let's look into this pragmatism theme a bit.

### The high pragmatism of ultralight

Of course, forums for discussion of outdoor topics feature other sorts of talk beyond just gear.  Places like [Backpackinglight.com](https://backpackinglight.com), or the subreddit [Ultralight](https://reddit.com/r/ultralight) also have spaces for talking about trip reports; there are invitations for meetups; introductions by new members; questions on etiquette or technique; and there are even philosophical musings about why and how we go outside.  Invariably though these discussions are anchored by significant amounts of text devoted to gear talk.  And by gear I mean not only tents or backpacking stoves, but also technical clothing and footwear.   Discussion can cover reviews, recommendations, or uses and often modifications of a producers' intent for an item.  A typical post might appear as a question regarding a piece's function, and whether it might fit a proposed trip: "will this sort of tent be appropriate in the alpine?"  "Which water filter is best for silty water?"  Answers usually involve the merits of a piece and, of course, the proposed weight of the solutions.

In the case of Backpackinglight.com, the forum is underwritten by gear producers (many of whom, in the ultralight world, are cottage-scale vendors with ardent groups of followers among forum participants).  Gear's popularity among this subset of the backpacking world seems to reflect the popularity of gear among the public broadly, a fact which is plain for anyone to see.  There are the endless magazine articles and trade shows.  In part this reflects the fact that backpacking and other outdoor pursuits can be costly or revenue-generating depending upon which side of the equation you stand.  One of my primary assumptions is that discussions about the latest puffy from Patagonia, or a Mountain Laurel Designs Trailstar, tend to interest those with disposable income.  Given the nature of wealth accumulation in the U.S., this likely means that discussion about gear is an activity largely (though by no means exclusively) conducted by non-BIPOC communities.  I hope to write a more thoughtful post about the relationship between the outdoor industrial complex and issues of race and gender later. This brief observation will have to suffice for now.

Stalwart backpackers and participants in these forums also explain general interest in talking about ultralight gear in terms of pragmatism.  The pragmatism argument ostensibly goes something like: people who apply themselves to backpacking will, sooner or later, be interested in finding out what works for them AND limiting the weight of the items they carry.  Though of course this sort of perspective isn't monolithic.  Forum participants tend to assume that a piece of gear ought to be evaluated by the specific situation of the user.  Going outside isn't like cooking coq au vin.  There is such a great degree of variability in styles, environments, seasonal and regional weather conditions that one can't simply identify a "very good" recipe for gear and proceed by steps to collect it all and put it to use.  

There are some distinguishing features to this pragmatism.  Discussion involves more than a strict up or down assessment of "it works or it doesn't."  Discussion of gear expands to permit talk about how the design of gear interacts with environments or the person's physical and mental characteristics.  Women, for example are assumed to "sleep colder" than men, and therefore are often given recommendations to examine warmer sleeping bags in their shopping (anthropologists of a certain generation would have had a field day with this folk observation about which settings, encounters, or even foods are gendered as "hot" or "cold" and how they vary culturally).  Forum users are continually creating posts with questions, inquiring if a jacket will keep them dry, if a sleeping bag will keep them warm, or a tent can operate in certain environmental conditions.  So in these discussions, a corollary to talk about gear is that discussants follow an axiom about statistical distribution: what works for a great number of people has a higher likelihood of working for the next user.  Much like the advice you'll get from a doctor, when a cluster of cases come down in the middle of the curve that's were the advice will be.   A piece of gear deemed pragmatic by a great number of participants is repeatedly recommended in threads on gear inquiries.  

Among the ultralight community this pragmatism combines a special emphasis on how function intersects with weight savings.  You could have a perfectly fine tent, but if it weighs three pounds it isn't pragmatic.  Other considerations beyond the weight/pragmatic, according to this view, are superfluous at best.  Sure, some people want to look good, or want the bleeding-edge advancement in their gear, but these are often dismissed as not pertinent to the "philosophy" of ultralight without further testing.  It seems that for some in the ultralight community a piece of gear which falls outside these parameters is nothing more than marketing gimmickry to unburden the unsuspecting consumer of their coin.

The pragmatic perspective includes interrelated talk about techniques for using gear and best practices for optimal pragmatism.  The saying that "cotton kills," widespread among Boy Scouts and outdoor communities of all stripes, is a premier example of the pragmatic viewpoint.  Bring the  wrong gear, and it might get you in much more trouble than you bargained for.  But while cotton is a straightforward example of a piece of gear which is problematic, such strict assessments are not always possible amid the products of a constantly innovating outdoor industry.  And yet by introducing the notion of danger in this manner, a discussant has a striking effect on the persuasiveness of their recommendation (which is really a truncated argument).  By saying that X piece of gear could possibly get you in trouble, whether or not that is a likely scenario for the user, you lend to your argument a sheen of competency as well as cast moral doubt on other choices.  This kind of idiom phrasing foregrounds the stakes and risks we face when we go outside and applies them to the condition of consumption in a neoliberal capitalist society in 2020.  Pragmatism talk therefore "constructs" a narrative framing about gear in which the truth of these material goods is understood through a perspective of immediacy, danger, and self-preservation which grants pragmatism arguments an urgency.  Pragmatism has a "truth" which is both constructed and deployed to prop up the proponents' positions and their statuses.  After all, plenty of people have gone outside in cotton and come back alive (not a recommendation, simply an observation to highlight the distinctiveness of the pragmatist language).  I myself have done so, and after learning from the outdoor community I no longer do it.

That is not to say that everyone who visits a forum to talk about gear believes in the pragmatist view.  Rather, the proponents of gear's pragmatism offer it as a defense of certain choices and a cultural logic of ultralight on "how to do backpacking" as it concerns both practical choices and an orientation to an unknown practice (which any walk into an unfamilar outdoors would be).  Moreover, the pragmatism defense is a "sensible" argument, by which I mean that even novice discussants have an intuitive understanding of whether a piece of gear can be judged according to its function and they attribute a higher value to the pragmatism argument when it arises.  Forum participants don't have to strictly believe it themselves in order for the pragmatism argument to have persuasive force in a discussion.  That everyone can recognize its contours and contend with its points amid any discourse says something as to its importance and adaptability. 

And this sort of pragmatism is an element of my own gear selection.  To give an example of this, I often think about the contrast between my summer and winter hiking styles.  I've noticed on summer hikes I have a vastly larger margin for error over temperature and sweat management when hiking outdoors than when I snowshoe in winter.  In summer, I'm essentially lazy.  I hike longer than I should without a breaks or snacks.  I don't always layer appropriately when I stop.  I power through complex situations.  During a mild 60-degree rain in the Cascades last weekend I thought to my self, "if I'd behaved this way when snowshoeing in January I'd likely be in a hypothermic stupor and headed to a bad place right now."  Pragmatism as a set of logics certainly does give this hiker a powerful framework of ideas about how to go about hiking and keep oneself safe.  But pragmatism isn't the only thing going on in these forums.

### Ascetical accumulation

The inherent pragmatism of some pieces over others is accompanied by a belief among some ultralight backpackers who seek to align a light base weight with a philosophy of independence from material goods.  Again, this subset doesn't speak for everyone, but the theme does come up often enough.

Take this [this blog post](https://backpackinglight.com/buy-less-do-more-good-enough-gear/) by Rex Sanders, which appeared as a standalone article on Backpackinglight.com.  Sanders argues that gear accumulation is explained by individual psychological factors, specifically "the hegemonic treadmill" of purchasing that next piece of gear when one doesn't need a replacement for it.   Setting aside an argument about the accuracy of Sanders' use of these psychological concepts, I think it is worth looking at Sander's intent in the article.  The article has a laudable goal of arguing for less gear accumulation, of recognizing a psychological process propelling accumulation, and avoiding it for the greater good of our natural environment.  

I want to underscore that these are laudable reasons to write the article.  Protecting our environment by reducing our dependence upon capitalist exploitation of that environment is a point well taken about the consumer economy.  Sanders argues the iterative upgrade cycle of contemporary gear production for the deep markets in the U.S. and Europe creates endless stuff.  I sympathize with this view.

But nothing about gear -- or any material object for that matter -- is innately irresistible.  Sanders  seems to posit that purchasing gear, for any other reason than pragmatism, involves being psychologically bamboozled somehow.  Whether you are fooled by advertising for non-pragmatic reasons, or fooled by the chemical operations of our brains, purchasing gear outside of pragmatism we exist in a state of untruth.  

Sanders' view seems like too strict an interpretation, one that is informed by a supreme pragmatism.  If mitigating gear accumulation is the goal, then that goal is better served by a more accurate of account who uses gear and why.  Who are the social groups surrounding gear and gear reviewers?  Is pragmatism all that is happening in a discussion about gear among diverse participants?  After all, the forums I'm talking about here are digital forms of gathering, spaces for producing social (digital) action.  An argument against accumulation for its own sake needs to take into account these cultural factors.  As I noted above, these are socially constucted cultural practices, not self-evident truths about the universe.

To give you an example of why these socio-cultural factors matter, consider Paul Magnanti's explainer of backpacking stoves in a [recent video post](https://pmags.com/my-backpacking-stoves-a-practical-look).  Magnanti is a popular figure among these forums, in part for advocating for thrifty alternatives to expensive backpacking gear.  Magnanti's theory is a bit tangential, so stick with me for a moment.  Magnanti discusses different types of stoves, among them the lightweight variety known as alcohol stoves.  I must be a bit of a dinosaur because Magnanti explains that alcohol stoves have declined in popularity of late, and he explains that you really only see them nowadays because a personality -- i.e. a hiking celebrity --  continues to use them.  Instead, Magnanti explains, today people tend to buy and carry cannister stoves because of burn bans (simple alcohol stoves don't have an "off" switch and are often banned in national forests trying to control forest first), and due to the now reasonable prices and weights of cannister alternatives.  Alcohol stoves remain in circulation, Magnanti seems to suggest, because they are signature pieces which act as signs of followers of YouTube personalities.  When Magnanti said this, I instantly thought of Shug Emery as a good example of a person with a YouTube channel who backpacks with an alcohol stove (not to throw shade at Shug, I highly recommend his videos to everyone, hammockers especially).

Magnanti demonstrates that contrary to being duped, having the latest piece of gear is a signal of status and belonging.  Moreover, the claim that we can get by with less is probably true, but it misses the point of being a gear "geek."  That is, gear and the perfection of your kit is as much as about the production of individual and group identities as it is about psychology or pragmatism.  Do you get on with those who use a hammock?  Those who use a tent?  Are you an absolute minimalist or a "semi-ultralight" backpacker as I position myself?  Discussion about these pieces asserts and elevates our self-understandings, the identities we choose to face the world, and do so especially in the digital spaces surrounding backpacking.  They further create transmission mechanisms between these spaces and the "real world," translating from digital spaces to backpacking spaces.  Discussion about gear, like discussion about art or other physical products of cultural producers, is discussion about social relationships, cultural practices, and our broader institutions and systems. ([^2]:)

Even an ascetical approach to gear, like that of how Sanders describes his own long experience with the ultralight philosophy, is itself a signal about status which is innately wound up with the practice of accumulation.  It seems to be no accident that Sanders stages a breezy equivalency between "the hegemonic treadmill" and "the 2,500-year-old Buddhist concept of '[dukkha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dukkha)'."  The Buddha himself is storied to have walked a path from luxury to asceticism, experiences which gave him the credibility to teach about the eight-fold path.  Not only does Sanders draw on this tradition to bolster his argument in an ad populist fashion (look, all the wise people think this way, not just our small corner of the internet), but the Buddha's own rejection of worldly attachments would seem to mirror Sanders' the intent of Sanders' argument and his own experience.  

To repeat, I'm not advocating for people to go out and spend on gear. On the contrary, I'm suggesting that the problem of accumulation is more complex than recognizing that we have duped by our brain or clever advertisers.  Accumulation is about communities of people, and the meanings they ascribe to their gear involves their relationships, relationships which serve as the foundation of these forums.  







[^1]: Then there was my height.  If you are considering going ultralight, and over six feet tall, know that you should always take your height into consideration when assessing the supposed weight savings of an ultralight product, as they may not be based your size.
[^2]: It is very interesting to think about how these cultural dynamics interact with neoliberal institutions and production, though for reasons of space this exploration will have to wait for a different post.