---
layout: post
author: Chris
title: On the High Pragmatism of the Ultralight
---

I think of myself as a backpacker.  Maybe even an ultralight backpacker.  Well, a semi-ultralight backpacker, as far as that goes.  In summer I seem to average around 17 pounds for my pack "base weight" (definition of this term varies but commonly refers to everything you carry except consumables).  Yes, I started down the ultralight road for a while after my return from fieldwork.  But with time, and more experience, I found that my preferences ran counter to a strict ultralight approach.  My National Outdoor Leadership School experience clashed with minimizing every last ounce.  Slimming down my medkit never seemed to be worth the weight trade-off.  Redundancies like an extra plastic spoon or tops for water bottles (which weigh little but provide peace of mind) always had a place in my pack.   And then there are the personal sundries: like a nice camera to memorialize the journey.  I am partial to hammocks instead of a minimal ground shelter because my back loves them, and that too has limited my ability to go *really* light.  ([^1]:)

Over time, I've added this weight back in.  From what I've read online this process of slimming down to a lower bound and then coming back up is not uncommon or even looked down upon.  This re-weighting process has been partly imposed by changing external constraints.  I can't use an alcohol stove in Western forests with burn bans, for example (no "off switch").  But I think I've found my personal point of balance between shedding weight and the gear that I take for extra security or comfort.  

I came to ultralight backpacking through online forums.  Ultralight backpackers minimize the weight of what we carry, which means gear takes heightened role in the rationale for these sites and content they put out.  Discussion on ultralight forums takes on an especially pragmatic tone, one that mixes an economy of weight with perspectives on function.  Pragmatism seems scientific, objective, or simply "good sense."  Perhaps this is because ultralighters weigh so much damned stuff.  Perhaps it is because pragmatic considerations align or are derived from with cultural logics of science more broadly as a manner of approaching the world.  These are conjectures to a question outside the scope of this post.  But I can say this, reading through the posts, one comes to see that it pragmatism is as much a cultural logic as it is based on science.  I keep coming back to these forums for discussion about gear, so let's look into this pragmatism theme a bit.

### The high pragmatism of ultralight

Of course, ultralight forums host other sorts of talk beyond just gear.  Places like [Backpackinglight.com](https://backpackinglight.com), or the subreddit [Ultralight](https://reddit.com/r/ultralight) also have spaces for talking about trip reports; there are invitations for meetups; introductions by new members; questions on etiquette or technique; and there are even philosophical musings about why and how we go outside.  Invariably though these discussions are anchored by significant amounts of text devoted to gear talk.  And by gear I mean not only tents or backpacking stoves, but also technical clothing and footwear.   Discussion can cover reviews, recommendations, or uses and modifications of a producers' intent for an item.  A typical post might appear as a question regarding a piece's function, and whether it might fit a proposed trip: "will this sort of tent be appropriate in the alpine?"  "Which water filter is best for silty water?"  Answers usually involve the merits of a piece and, of course, the proposed weight of the solutions.

In the case of Backpackinglight.com, the forum is underwritten by gear producers (many of whom, in the ultralight world, are cottage-scale vendors with ardent groups of followers among forum participants).  Gear's popularity among this subset of the backpacking world seems to reflect the popularity of gear among the public broadly, a fact which is plain for anyone to see.  There are the endless magazine articles and trade shows.  In part this reflects the fact that backpacking and other outdoor pursuits can be costly or revenue-generating depending upon which side of the equation you stand.  One of my primary assumptions is that discussions about the latest puffy from Patagonia, or a Mountain Laurel Designs Trailstar, tend to interest those with disposable income.  Given the nature of wealth accumulation in the U.S., this likely means that discussion about gear is an activity largely (though by no means exclusively) conducted by non-BIPOC communities.  I hope to write a more thoughtful post about the relationship between the outdoor industrial complex and issues of race and gender later. This brief observation will have to suffice for now.

Recommending gear tends to follow the lines of an argument about pragmatism of the recommended piece.  Discussion involves more than a strict up or down assessment of "it works or it doesn't."  Instead talk expands to how the design of gear interacts with environments or the person's physical and mental characteristics.  Women, for example are assumed to "sleep colder" than men, and therefore are often given recommendations to examine warmer sleeping bags in their shopping (anthropologists of a certain generation would have had a literal field day with this folk observation about which settings, encounters, or even foods are gendered as "hot" or "cold" and how they vary culturally).  Forum users are continually creating posts with questions, inquiring if a jacket will keep them dry, if a sleeping bag will keep them warm, or a tent can operate in certain environmental conditions. 

Since this is ultalight, this pragmatism combines a special emphasis on how function intersects with weight savings.  You could have a perfectly fine tent, but if it weighs three pounds it isn't pragmatic.  Other considerations beyond these weight/function pragmatic considerations, according to this view, are superfluous at best.  Sure, some people want to look good, or want the bleeding-edge technological advance in their gear, but these are often dismissed as not pertinent to the "philosophy" of ultralight without proof from extended field use.  Some even go so far as to suggest that a piece of gear which falls outside these parameters is nothing more than marketing gimmickry to unburden the unsuspecting consumer of their coin.

The pragmatic perspective includes interrelated talk about techniques for using gear and best practices for optimal pragmatism.  The saying that "cotton kills," widespread among Boy Scouts and outdoor communities of all stripes, is a premier example of this pragmatic viewpoint.  Bring the  wrong gear, and it might get you in much more trouble than you bargained for.  But while cotton is a straightforward example of a piece of gear which is problematic, such strict assessments are not always possible amid the products of a constantly innovating outdoor industry.  The phrase itself however is emblematic of the pragmatic mindset: bring the wrong gear and it could get you into trouble, sometimes serious trouble.  Introducing this element of danger, has a striking effect on the persuasiveness of a recommendation.  By saying that X piece of gear could possibly get you in trouble, whether or not that is a likely scenario for the user, lends a sheen of authority to the person recommending the item, it suggests the speaker/writer has the authority of experience to speak about a piece of gear's use in the field. More than this, it also constructs a set of ethical choices about what "good" ultralight backpacking consists of.  

This kind of idiom phrasing foregrounds the stakes and risks we face when we go outside and applies them to the condition of consumption in a neoliberal capitalist society in 2020.  Pragmatism talk therefore "constructs" a narrative framing about gear in which the truth of these material goods is understood through a perspective of immediacy, exigency, and danger which grants pragmatism arguments a greater weight than just a plain recommendation.  Pragmatism thus has a "truth" which is both constructed and deployed to prop up the proponents' positions and their status within an online community.  After all, plenty of people have gone outside in cotton and come back alive (not a recommendation, simply an observation to highlight the distinctiveness of the pragmatist language).  I myself have done so, and after learning from the outdoor community I no longer "good" to make that choice as a backpacker.  The point here isn't that these recommendations are somehow "false" or "unscientific", whatever that may mean, but that they are cultural phenomena as much as anything else.

Certainly, not everyone who visits a forum to talk about gear believes in the pragmatist view.  Rather, the proponents of gear's pragmatism offer it as a defense of certain choices.  In this sense, it is a cultural logic of ultralight on "how to do backpacking" as it concerns both practical choices (what do I take with me when I go outside?) and an orientation to an unknown practice (any walk in a backcountry longer than a few hours might raise questions like: How do I eat?  How do I sleep?  How do I deal with weather/environment?).  But pragmatism defense is an easily "sensible" argument, by which I mean that novice discussants can make intuitive connections between common cultural ideas and ultralight talk to come to attribute a higher value to the pragmatism argument when it arises.  In other words, the pragmatism argument is a contender.  Forum participants don't have to strictly believe it themselves in order for the pragmatism argument to have persuasive significance to a discussion.  That many can recognize its contours and contend with its points amid any discussion says something as to its importance and adaptability. 

To be clear, this sort of pragmatism is an element of my own gear selection.  To give an example of this, I often think about the contrast between my summer and winter hiking styles.  I've noticed on summer hikes I have a vastly larger margin for error over temperature and sweat management when hiking outdoors than when I snowshoe in winter.  In summer, I'm essentially lazy.  I hike longer than I should without a breaks or snacks.  I don't always layer appropriately when I stop.  I power through complex situations.  During a break in short sleeves during a mild 60-degree rain in the Cascades one weekend I thought to myself, "if I'd behaved this way when snowshoeing in January I'd likely be in a hypothermic stupor and headed to a bad place right now."  Pragmatism as a set of logics certainly does give this hiker a powerful framework of ideas about how to go about hiking and keep oneself safe.  But pragmatism isn't the only thing going on in these forums.

### Ascetical accumulation

The inherent pragmatism of some pieces over others is accompanied by a belief among some ultralight backpackers who seek to align a light base weight with a philosophy of independence from material goods.  Again, this subset doesn't speak for everyone, but the theme does come up often enough.

Take this [this blog post](https://backpackinglight.com/buy-less-do-more-good-enough-gear/) by Rex Sanders, which appeared as a standalone article on Backpackinglight.com.  Sanders argues that gear accumulation is explained by individual psychological factors, specifically "the hegemonic treadmill" of purchasing that next piece of gear when one doesn't need a replacement for it.   Setting aside an argument about the accuracy of Sanders' use of these psychological concepts, I think it is worth looking at Sander's intent in the article.  The article has a laudable goal of arguing for less gear accumulation, of recognizing reactive processes propelling accumulation, and opting for reflection and restraint for the greater good of our natural environment.  

I want to underscore that these are laudable reasons to write the article.  Protecting our environment by reducing our dependence upon capitalist exploitation of that environment is a point well taken about the consumer economy.  Sanders argues the iterative upgrade cycle of contemporary gear production for the deep markets in the U.S. and Europe creates endless stuff.  I sympathize with this view.  However, as some of my phrasing here might hint, I think this problem exists in neoliberal structures of socio-economic practice as much as anything to do with an individual choice.

But nothing about the acts of purchasing or talking about gear -- or any material object for that matter -- lies entirely within our psychological being.  Sanders seems to posit that purchasing gear, for any other reason than pragmatism, involves a process that seems vaguely like self-trickery.  Whether we are fooled by (distinctly non-pragmatic) advertising, or by the chemical operations of our brains, purchasing gear for reasons outside of this asestetical pragmatism ensures that we exist in a state of untruth.  

Sanders' view seems like too strict an interpretation.  If mitigating gear accumulation is the goal, then that goal is better served by a more accurate of account who uses gear and why.  Who are the social groups surrounding gear discussions and gear reviewers?  Pragmatism's weight as an enlargement might lead us to believe that our talk in these spaces is nothing more than "objective" discussion, a weighing of the facts about weights.  But is that all that goes on in a discussion about gear among diverse participants?  After all, the forums I'm talking about here are digital forms of gathering, spaces for producing social (digital) action, for producing ultralight as a form of action in the world.  I "became" an ultralight backpacker through them.  An argument against accumulation for its own sake needs to take into account these cultural factors.  

To give you an example of why these socio-cultural factors matter, consider Paul Magnanti's explainer of backpacking stoves in a [recent video post](https://pmags.com/my-backpacking-stoves-a-practical-look).  Magnanti is a popular figure among these forums, in part for advocating for thrifty alternatives to expensive backpacking gear.  My thought on Magnanti's video is a bit tangential, so stick with me for a moment.  Magnanti discusses different types of stoves, among them the lightweight variety known as alcohol stoves.  Magnanti explains that alcohol stoves have declined in popularity of late, and he explains that you really only see them nowadays because a personality -- i.e. a hiking celebrity --  continues to use them.  Instead, today people tend to buy and carry cannister stoves because of burn bans (simple alcohol stoves don't have an "off" switch and are often banned in national forests trying to control forest fires), and due to the now reasonable prices and weights of cannister alternatives.  Alcohol stoves remain in circulation, Magnanti seems to suggest, because they are signature pieces which act as signs of followers of YouTube personalities.  When Magnanti said this, I instantly thought of Shug Emery as a good example of a person with a YouTube channel who backpacks with an alcohol stove (not to throw shade at Shug, I highly recommend his videos to everyone, hammockers especially, and love alcohol stoves myself eventhough I no longer use them).

Magnanti demonstrates my point that talk about gear and gear accumulation is a signal of status and belonging.  This is something more significant and actively cultivated than simply being "duped" by our unconscious.  Sanders' claim that we can get by with less is probably true, but it misses the point of being a gear "geek."  Gear and the perfection of your kit is as much as about finding a place in a community as it is about psychology or pragmatism.  Do you get on with those who use a hammock or those who use a tent (the two seem to throw shade at each other more and more these days)?  Are you an absolute minimalist or a "semi-ultralight" backpacker as I position myself?  Discussion about gear asserts and elevates our self-understandings, the identities we choose to put out into the world, especially in the constructed digital spaces surrounding backpacking.  Discussion about gear, like discussion about art or other physical products of cultural producers, is discussion about social relationships, cultural practices, and our broader institutions and systems. ([^2]:)  It creates ultralight, in a sense.

To repeat, I'm not advocating for people to go out and spend on gear. On the contrary, I'm suggesting that the problem of accumulation is more complex than an entirely individual-psychological process of recognizing spontaneous buying or identifying when we are being caught by advertising.  Asecetism and pragmatism in these ways masks the cultural actions going on in these forums and even leads some to think that the science of psychology can "solve" the enviornmental impacts of gear production.  Accumulation is about specific communities of people, and the meanings they ascribe to that gear involves their relationships, relationships which serve to bring ultralight into being as much as anything.

[^1]: Then there was my height.  If you are considering going ultralight, and over six feet tall, know that you should always take your height into consideration when assessing the supposed weight savings of an ultralight product, as they may not be based your size.
[^2]: It is very interesting to think about how these cultural dynamics interact with neoliberal institutions and production, though for reasons of space this exploration will have to wait for a different post.