---
layout: post
author: Chris
title: Rereading Zama
---

*Zama* by Antonio .  Before I went into academia, I didn't tend to read books more than once.  I was always drawn to the next adventure, rather than reliving a previous one.  When I did return to a book I'd read, it could have been because I wasn't particularly attentive the first time, that I'd been overly focused on plot at the expense of other gems, or because it held some insight that I'd only glimpsed on the first go. Regarding this last, perhaps it was an insight into life, but as I reach middle age, I find now that it was more often than not an inishgt about myself.  Gabriel Garcia Marquez's 100 Years of Solitude, John Steinbeck's East of Eden, and Shirley Hazzard's *The Great Fire* were the kinds of books I reread for insights about myself in my twenties.  I reread Cormac McCarthy's *The Crossing* in my Thirties.  Having reached fourty, it must say something interesting about me that I've reread the English translation of *Zama*.



His bumbling qualities seems unnaturally heightened - he's tender to the person who is ensnaring him, incensed while someone is showing him kindness - his moods swing out of proportion, always a step behind, to the events unfolding around him.  In this way he seems particularly ragged form for this life.



In the latter half of the book, XXX seemingly shifts the narrative from what hitherto had been a style which leaned towards realism to a seemingly fantastical tone.  Rather than take this section as an example of magical realism, I found this to be a projection of Zama's psyche into the material world.  