---
layout: post
author: Chris
title: 


---

### We Moved!

Back in March we moved to a new home in West Seattle.  We're really pleased to be here.  I have a list of home projects as long as my arm.  In short, too many tasks and not enough time to write.

### Books

*Klara and The Sun* by Kazuo Ishiguro - This is my second time reading one of Ishiguro's works.  I find I can only talk about this book in the abstract, though I did like it.  Previously, I slogged through *The Buried Giant*, and found that book downright puzzling.  Obscurity, it seems, by design in Ishiguro's works: he seems intent on challenging conventional structures of storytelling in writing.  Reading *Klara and The Sun* after *The Buried Giant*, I began to see I needed to adjust my expectations coming to an Ishiguro work.

In *Klara* he expertly, and patiently, seduces you into caring for average-in-just-about-every-way protagonists.  His prose is so easy to read -- what some call "singular, lightly formal diction" -- that you quickly forget that you are reading at all.  His craft is so good that we become intimate with robot characters (though this is because they don't act like robots in any typical way we think about robots, [but are more human](https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v43/n06/thomas-jones/oh-you-darling-robot)).  He slowly but surely builds on his consistent themes of memory and obsolescence.  And yes, there is an Ishiguro-special: a narrative twist, one that often subverts cultural norms.  This twist is intimated though rarely openly discussed.  I won't spoil it.  

My challnage as a reader coming to *Klara* was  I expected the narrative to come to a conventional kind of climax, if not a clear resolution.  While the book has a kind of traditional unity -- its not an avant-garde, or surrealist sort of work -- it nevertheless opts out of an emotional resolution to the story.  Other readers may revel in the freedom of *Klara's* ending, but I find it frustratingly vague on the "message" of a work, if Ishiguro believes in such a thing.

Ishiguro creates a really subtle but realistic sense of foreboding as well.  The metaphysical world plays no small part in this emotional theme, with ritual and religious scenes providing fascinating scenes of making the familiar of religious life strange through robot worship.  To an anthropologist, these references feel more like gestures to the spiritual significance of ritual and religion, rather than fully fledged literary explorations of the social technology of ritural.  This is perhaps because Ishiguro wants to make a narrower point regarding the nature of contemporary techological advance and society's relationship to sacrifice (which was once expressed through religious ritual).  But his exploration stumbles by leaving out the ethnographic detail, since the references to ritual are generic; it is difficult to guage their import since we are seeing the world through a robot's child-like perception of reality. What's more, Ishiguro introduces a kind of written Cubism to many of the metaphysical episodes, making them more abstract than socioculturally grounded.  It is true that Klara's unencumbered perspective might offer us an elementary view of love and sacrifice, but there also the problem that for Klara's simplicity she risks an impoverished perspective.  Impoverished in its ability to credibly grasp complexity in understanding human frailty and histories.  Thus, when we see, through Klara, that the sun is a god-like entity desiring that she intervene in the relationships of teenagers, I found it difficult to credit Klara with a clear grasp of the histories of the people involved and there rationales for their choices in acting on the Sun's wishes, and so felt that all the intimacy Ishiguro had created between the reader and Klara took a blow.  But then, perhaps that subversion was his intent.

*We Run the Tides* by Vendela Vida - Just a quick plug for this one as I read it months ago and its already fading in my momory: this was my first book by Vida and wow, it was great.  After reading a few poorly written novels just prior, it was so refreshing to come into Vida's distinct writing style.  She's got a real talent and I'd love to read some of her other works.  This is also a great example of a book that creates atmosphere: of a world that once existed in the form of the Bay Area in the late 80s/early 90s.  While it's a "coming of age" story, it is really focused on how teenage girls must navigate complex structures of power and misogeny where they face most of the downside risks.  I admit, reading about their sex lives was uncomfortable, but I never for a moment thought they were inaccurate or diversions.  When Eulabee finds herself in situtations where older males can press their advantages into sex, the stakes were all too uncomfortably real.  These scenes are brief though they remain significant for the remaining plot, and yet Vida delivers them without a tone of outrage.  Instead, they are so matter-of-fact that an unattuned reader may not feel Vida's nudge about the injustice of what they are witnessing.  

My discussion here makes the novel seem very centered on the cultural politics of teenage sexuality, and while the book is undeniably about that, it really is a pleasure to walk in the world Vida creates and watch Eulabee grow even if it is among the hidden dangers of the pre-tech San Francisco upper crust.  The ending has a really satisfying exploration of the meanings of the relationships involved for Eulabee as well.