***Tyll*** by Daniel Kehlmann - This book was a terrific change from my usual literary diet and I loved it.  Since graduating from anthropology, I've been drawn to history.  In part the draw for me is the same as that in ethnography: a desire to know how other people see the world differently, of what their lives were like.  As John Lanchaster put it, reading history make it possible to stretch ["out our imagination and empathy in time, we can connect with these people,"](https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v42/n24/john-lanchester/twenty-types-of-human) and glimpse their lives. Hilary Matnel's books, along with Mary XXX's SPQR, were fascinating, and I always especially enjoyed the ethnographic details even if I always wished there were more.  Tyll satisfied that impulse and brought humor to the equation in spades.

Several critics in reviews used the term *picaresque* when referring to this style of book, though I think Anthony Cummins [got it right](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2020/feb/18/tyll-daniel-kehlmann-review) when he suggested Kehlmann's work is partly picaresque and partly an absurdist take on the politicking of the thirty years' war.  Through Kehlmann's telling there is a tragicomic dimension to elites' decision-making, influencing the lives of "ordinary people" in incredible ways.  The figure of Tyll represents a kind of chaotic absurdity.  Yes, Kehlmann gives him a backstory but these origins hold less significance than this representation.   When Tyll appears on the scene of momentous events, his embodiment of absurdity colors the high politicking going on among “serious” people which makes up much of this book.  Kehlmann's work reminds me generally that the carnavelesque, a la Bahktin or XXX, at least in a classical sense, isn't something we see much of in the U.S. (though there might be an argument for analogues like in political satire).