Foundation as a renewal of Tech's Utopian myth?  A close watching of an episode

Why does this show prompt a strong response in me?  I came to this series without any prior knowledge of the source material.  I didn't have the kind of investment in it that Paul Krugman does, for instance.  But I do love a good scifi.  From my perspective, Foundation represents a renewal of the techno-Utopian motives that advocates of tech impart to their products.  Foundations' flaws originate from those motives, and in turn broadcast the shortcomings of tech through a genre narrative.

Before I watched Foundation, like any self-respecting scholar I dug into the literature.  Reading some of the reviews I noticed critics often pointed out that many of the original male characters of Asimov's novel were palyed in the TV series by women of color.  From an anthropological perspective this also drew me to the series.  I hadn't read the original work, so I had no investment the fan politics of this shift, but I do have an interest in seeing sophisticated drama with people of color at the center.

So, having watched four episodes, I can say I like a few things.  I like the actors.  I'm impressed with the special effects and attention to technical detail.  Some of the script writing, apart from the math tutorial scenes, are interesting to listen to.  The dialogue is inconsistent in that way; sometimes stiff in exposition, sometimes florid.

Watching episode four, thought, I was struck by the incongruities between settings and actors while affect and tone of the episode remained constant.  Within the episode there are several shifts in space (and time as well, I'm not sure).  In one scene the plucky underdog Warden is reeling off spymaster-level insights into the motives an unknown enemy captive.  Scene shift and we are next watching a god-like monarch have a temper tantrum when his academic minions cannot so much as summon a coherent statement as to why fortunetelling is impossible.  Setting aside how the writers skate over the plausibility of these scenarios, my issue is a broader one concerning what these scenes don't have in common.  

Its obvious to the audience that these are very different circumstances, but I'll belabor the obvious and point out that differences in race, gender, and not least, power, make them strikingly distinct.  The show's creators are deliberately upending traditional race and gender roles from Asimov's source materials in which most roles belonged to men, and in that act of recontextualization, the scenes in which a young woman of color leads a rebellion, are refreshed (e.g. Henry Stanton's rebellion).  Her actions are given new ethical imperative through the subtext of racial and gender advancement in the contemporary moment.  The ethical position of the Warden is underpinned by these reversals of race and gender, lending strength to her "argument" for rebellion. No audience would then expect that the scenes featuring the Warden would share an affective register with scenes depicting Emperor's life.  The writers already subverted any possibility of a common tone by inverting the race and gender of the characters, it would be illogical to use the same register in scenes featuring a white man in a positon of supreme power.  Strangely, in episode four each of these scenarios are interspersed with oneanother, drawing incongruous association under a single score.  I suppose this might be meant to impart that very different circumstances are all subject to the fate of Henry Stanton's math, but the impression is more complicated.

Ushering an audience through these situations as though share a common while using a single affective tone -- a generalized sense of urgency -- undermines the different poignancy of the scenes.  The rightous poignancy of the warden's budding rebellion is set on the same level as the poignancy of decline in the Emporor's recriminations.  Why the Emperor's tantrums are granted the same affective register of urgency as the Wardens' defenses of the colony?  I mean, it does give Lee Pace space to flex his gift for acting out the grandiose in mid-breakdown.  But this single affective register for the episode creates a syncopated effect where the action of the story seems out of step with the pitch or the emotional performance of the actors.  This dissonance moves from implicit to explicit in the final moments of the episode when it wraps with a voice layover of banalities about freewill vs. fate interspersed between onscreen dialogue and action.  I ended up as much in confusion as with a sense of the gravity of urgency/danger/chaos the protagonists faced.  

What does this have to do with the tech industry?  This all comes across as a bit of a ham-fisted handling of context.  The context of power, race and gender dynamics, to say nothing of sociocultural histories, plays no part in informing the emotional impact of the scenes.  When I think about it though, Foundation as a work, and Apple as a company seem to have flattening context as a goal.  That's a feature, not a bug.  This is obviously a subject for a dissertation, but it's really tempting to connect this neglect of context to the central conceit of a tech company such as Apple: that  its products remove extraneous socio-political obstacles and middlemen from our worlds, supposedly making us freer, more connected, removing obstacles of politics, cultural practices, of history.  Perhaps that is why Asimov's novel was so compelling to workers at Apple as a project for their narrative studios. Harry Stanton's numbers cutting across the complexities of human action, resemble their own aspirations for their products.

