---
layout: post
title: Wacquat's Prisonfare Illuminates the Action of Institutional Racism
---

*"there exists a deep structural and functional connection between market rule and punishment after the close of the Keynesian-Fordist era." (Wacquat 2012:67)*

Racism in Peru had both similarities and differences from the U.S.  As a result, I'm finding I still have much to learn on the matter of racisms against black, indigenous and people of color (BIPOC) in this country.  Luckily, there are a number of well informed voices speaking to the deadly challenges facing these peoples today.  And while there have been a number of activist voices speaking out, this subject has been one anthropology's core themes for some time.  One of my friends, [Dr. Donna Austin](https://anthropology.rutgers.edu/academics/graduate/graduate-students/cultural-anthropology/493-donna-auston), wrote her dissertation on "To Be Black, Muslim, and Activist: Race, Islam, and Spiritual Protest in the Post-Ferguson Era" (more links when I have them).  I attended grad school alongside Dr. Austin and hold vivid memories of graduate seminars in shaggy attic classrooms where Dr. Austin pushed us to think about the lives of unseen.  Anthropology has also recently undergone something of renewal in addressing the public on these matters with the curation of lists and other resources. The Association for Political and Legal Anthropology (APLA) put out this one on [resrouces for understanding race in the U.S.](https://politicalandlegalanthro.org/2020/06/11/statement-and-resources/) and there is this [almanac from the American Anthropological Association](https://www.americananthro.org/ParticipateAndAdvocate/Landing.aspx?ItemNumber=25744) on anti-BIPOC racism.

Rather than recreate the wheel, in this inaugural post I want to point to the scope of institutionalized racisms by looking beyond policing to prisons and neoliberalism.  Addressing policing is important, though I think many across the spectrum of anti-BIPOC racism activism have notions of that scale of instituional racisms reaches beyond policing.  In this regard I've been thinking a lot lately about the work of a scholar named Loïc Wacquant.  Ordinarily I relied on Wacquant's works to understand the significance of neoliberalism and state-formation for people from indigenous backgrounds in Peru.  I gave less attention to Wacquant's discussion of state-formation and penalization, but he had significant things to say about the United States. In light of the protests surrounding the deaths this spring of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, and Tony McDade, among others, Wacquant's argument has a renewed relevance.  While Wacquant doesn't explicitly draw out the links between historical racisms in the U.S. and his theory of the penal state, he gives us the room to draw those connections in bolder lines.  

Wacquant uses the term *Prisonfare* to refer to the expansion of criminal justice and corresponding increase in the prison population.  In explicit contrast to welfare, he sees the growth of these disciplinary "fares" while social welfare policies receded after the 1960s.  Wacquant theorizes that prisonfare composes an ensemble of regulations to shape the behaviors and life paths available to BIPOC communities.  There is a lot to unpack in Wacquant 's thinking, but it pays to focus in on his discussion of penalization, neoliberalism and states to see the linkages between these phenomena.

To start, the title of Wacquant's article is formidable: "Three steps to a historical anthropology of actually existing neoliberalism" (and yes, it is an indication of the kind of prose you'll find).  Wacquant discusses neoliberalism as a creation of states, in which a form of economic exchange ("the market") is brought about by the actions, symbols, and logics of elites controlling state institutions.  Through laws with distinctive racial assumptions about different social groups; policies eradicating social welfare in favor of criminal justice; and commonplace bureaucratic obstacles a wave of disciplinary and regulatory obstacles shape our lives according to neoliberal imperatives.  To formulate a specific kind of market state officials implement these conditions, and generate workers who are unable to resist corporatization or the primacy of state sovereign power.

BIPOC communities are subjected to extremes of market insecurity without state supports or informal mutual aid networks (e.g. family or community supports which once udnerpinned society).  Looking at the historical expansion of neoliberalism, Wacquant underscores penalization as a core means of mitigating these social disruptions to white communities.  When social disorder follows from this narrowing scope for social supports in daily life, the police and prisons step in to enforce the conditions allowing neoliberal markets to continue. He draws a comparison to the explosion in the penal population in the U.S. to British workhouses, those Victorian institutions which exiszed the poor as a matter of the "proper" functioning of society:

> Much like the ‘long sixteenth century’ saw the birth of the modern Leviathan in Western Europe (Ertman 1997), including the invention of poor relief and the penal prison, as part of the rocky transition from feudalism to mercantilist capitalism, our own century’s turn has witnessed the fashioning of a novel kind of state that purports to enshrine markets and embrace liberty, but in reality reserves liberalism and its benefits for those at the top while it enforces punitive paternalism upon those at the bottom. Instead of viewing the police, the court, and the prison as technical appendages for fighting crime, we must recognise that they constitute core political capacities through which the Leviathan governs physical space, cuts up social space, dramatises symbolic divisions and stages sovereignty. (Wacquant 2012:76)

State criminal justice activities designed to matintain order in social space and cement symbolic racial divisions translate into crushing lived experiences of marginalization, impoverishment and violence for people of color in the U.S.  While it is out of the order of the structure of Wacquant's article, a passage from an earlier section explains twhy public officials are motivated to implement prisonfare.  Paradoxically, prisonfare is intended to bolster the failing legitimacy of those very elites.  As police and public officials no longer act as guardians or purveyors of social welfare, the justification for government administration has also fallen away.  Reaching for a new justification these elites grasp at prisonfare.  He writes:

>putting the marginalised fractions of the postindustrial working class under stern tutelage guided by moral behaviourism offers a prime theatrical stage onto which governing elites can project the authority of the state and shore up the deficit of legitimacy they suffer whenever they forsake its established missions of social and economic protection (Wacquant 2012:67)

That is the "law and order" planks of both political parties act as a justification as well as a display of competency to a majority white population.  Establishing a problem of their own making, political elites alternate between devising laws and regulations which eradicate support for everyone, and righteously taking to the bully pulpit to fight the problems of their own making.  Along the way they shore up the state's primacy, and their own position within it, in what amounts to a struggle against their own population.

A history of racism in the U.S. is important to understanding racisms against BIPOC communities.  I argue that understanding that history also requires that we understand how the neoliberal turn in this country perpetuates racist practices into institutional fixtures.  Wacquant's critique reminds us that the neoliberal project is an ongoing, active creation in which a historical trajectory of racism connects with elite projects to enforce a market favorable to commodification and marketization of social life.  Prisonfare stands next to policies in education, health and housing which contribute to the broader scope of institutional racisms.  As a composite, they form a devastating set of realities for people of color, and will require addressing each, even as the subject of institutional racisms in policing now gains deserved public scrutiny.

