#1st Raspberry Pi: Pi-hole & DNScrypt

Over the past year I've gone down a rabbit hole.  That rabbit hole is called single board computers.  I had no idea that tinkering with these elementary computers would presage a trip into computer programming -- one which has been fascinating, especially from the perspective of giving the amateur user increased control and customization.  

I should state at the onset that I'm completely self-taught when it comes to tech.  My background is as a social scientist with an emphasis on qualitative methods, so I do not have official training outside some work on STATA for Statistics courses or having excel formula language I picked up on my own.  Using the Linux-style environments of these boards (i.e. the command line) is completely new to me.  

I bought a [Raspberry Pi](https://www.raspberrypi.org) (RPI) about a year ago to begin building my own network-wide ad blocker.  Even though I didn't have any formal training, I've always valued a certain form of self-reliance (don't get me started on how complex that theme can be from the standpoint of U.S. culture).  So the advertising over the RPIs resonated with me.

What follows is mostly a descriptive account of how I got set up.  If you are looking for more detailed guides, try the links.



###The RPI Board

For the first board, I started with a Raspberry Pi 3b+ to install [Pi-hole](https://pi-hole.net/): a network ad blocker that functions in principle by using individual rules or third party lists to block domain requests to/from the network.  Some describe Pi-hole as a domain name system (DNS for other novices like myself) server.  

Raspbian is the operating system specially designed for Raspberry Pis by the Raspberry Pi foundation.  PIXEL (Pi Improved Xwindow Environment, Lightweight if you're wondering), is the desktop environment that comes with Raspbian.  If you have any familiarity with any of the commercially available operating systems then you'll find your way around PIXEL in short order.  I wanted to learn how to use the command line in Linux, so I quickly trashed a couple of setups in order to learn how to operate up a "headless" version using SSH protocol where the board boots to the command line interface without a monitor connected to the board.  I also installed the "lite" version, foregoing PIXEL.  This was a bit trial and error period, I ended up erasing my SD card when things didn't turn out exactly as I wanted or creating backups of its contents when I succeeded, so I could re-flash the whole system when it broke.  This was "lighter" in terms of resources from what I understand and taught me really basic SSH protocol.  I won't recreate this process here as it is very well documented, and often appears in tutorials on whatever you might want to do with a RPI.  You can always start [here.](https://projects.raspberrypi.org/en/projects/raspberry-pi-setting-up)



###Pi-hole

Actually, there isn't much to guide a newcomer through regarding this stage.  The great folks over at the Pi-hole project have done a tremendous amount of work to simplify everything.  You do have to install from the command line.   So long as you can access the CL, you can install Pi-hole with a simple "bash" command found [here](https://github.com/pi-hole/pi-hole/#curl--ssl-httpsinstallpi-holenet--bash).  The entire instillation is automated from that point.  

Depending on the setup of your network, you may next have to tell your router to direct requests through the pihole server by setting the primary DNS to the IP address of the pihole RPI.

Once everything is installed and you have access to the user interface on your home network.  The dashboard is usually accessible from a numerical IP address assigned, by your router, to the pihole server.  

Once you are up and running, you can add blocklists.  There are plenty of lists on the web, though I have found the info and curation at https://firebog.net/ to be especially helpful for the novice user.

I couldn't be happier with Pi-hole's day-to-day performance.  Its operation offers a log of all DNS requests routed through its program.



###Dnscrypt-Proxy 2 with Pi-hole

Giddy from my success, and the ease with which I obtained it, I moved on to another project.  On the same RPI I also installed a program encrypting DNS queries using DNS over HTTPS called [DNS Crypt Proxy 2](https://github.com/jedisct1/dnscrypt-proxy).  This certainly took a little more work on the command line to implement than the non-technical user would know.  Some folks have done a wonderful job documenting how to implement this encryption with Pi-hole though, so if you are inclined, it will take a little time but it isn't too hard.  [This page](https://github.com/pi-hole/pi-hole/wiki/DNSCrypt-2.0) guides you through how to download and extract the files to your RPI.  Next up you have to customize the program to work alongside your RPI by opening something called a .toml file, and by going into the pihole dashboard to make some changes from the default configurations.

There is a section on the above link on how to test your configuration to see if its working.  You can also try the instructions on [the wiki](https://github.com/jedisct1/dnscrypt-proxy/wiki/Checking).

I also gather that with RPIs such as this which are exposed to the internet that it is important to [beef up the security](https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/configuration/security.md) of the boards.  


