---
layout: post
title: Wacquat's Prisonfare and the Scope of Institutional Racism
---

*"there exists a deep structural and functional connection between market rule and punishment after the close of the Keynesian-Fordist era." (Wacquat 2012:67)*


There are a number of well informed voices speaking to the deadly challenges facing people of color in the U.S. today. While there have been a number of activist voices speaking out, this subject has been one anthropology's core themes for some time.  One of my friends, [Dr. Donna Austin](https://anthropology.rutgers.edu/academics/graduate/graduate-students/cultural-anthropology/493-donna-auston), wrote her dissertation on "To Be Black, Muslim, and Activist: Race, Islam, and Spiritual Protest in the Post-Ferguson Era."  I attended grad school alongside Dr. Austin and hold vivid memories of graduate seminars in shaggy attic classrooms where Dr. Austin pushed us to think about the lives of unseen.  Anthropology has also recently undergone something of renewal to its public face, with the publishing of lists such as this one from the Association for Political and Legal Anthropology (APLA) [on resrouces for understanding race in the U.S.](https://politicalandlegalanthro.org/2020/06/11/statement-and-resources/) (https://politicalandlegalanthro.org/2020/06/11/statement-and-resources/).

Rather than recreate the wheel, I'd like to look at the complexity of American institutional racism. In this inaugural post I want to point to the scope of this problem for people of color by looking beyond policing to prisons and neoliberalism.  I've been thinking a lot lately about the work of a scholar named Loïc Wacquant in this regard. Ordinarily I relied on Wacquant's works to understand the significance of neoliberalism and state-formation for people from indigenous backgrounds in Peru.  I gave less attention to Wacquant's discussion of state-formation and penalization, but he had significant things to say about the U.S. In light of the protests surrounding the deaths of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor, among others, Wacquant's argument has a renewed relevance.  

He uses the term *Prisonfare* to refer to the expansion of criminal justice activity and corresponding increase in the prison population as social welfare policies receded after the 1960s in the U.S.  Wacquant theorizes that prisonfare (along with 'workfare') compose an ensemble of regulations to control racialized populations.  There is a lot to unpack in Wacquant 's thinking, but it pays to focus in on his discussion of penalization, neoliberalism and states to see the linkages between these phenomena.

The title of Wacquant's article is formidable: "Three steps to a historical anthropology of actually existing neoliberalism" (and yes, it is an indication of the kind of prose you'll find).  Wacquant discusses neoliberalism as a creation of states, in which a form of economic exchange is brought about by the actions, symbols, and logics of elites controlling state institutions.  Laws with distinctive racial assumptions about different social groups; policies eradicating social welfare in favor of criminal justice; and commonplace bureaucratic obstacles together act as a kind of "moral suasion" to regulate the behavior of marginalized groups.  To formulate a specific kind of market state officials implement these conditions, and generate workers who are unable to resist corporatization or the primacy of state sovereign power.

Looking at the historical expansion of neoliberalism, Wacquant underscores penalization as a core focus of this elite project of brining a neoliberal market into being.  He argues the state uses prisons and police as the coercive counterpart to the project above.  Police and prisons  those at the bottom to conform to these market imperatives.  In Wacquant's theory, people of color are criminalized for being poor, for the fact that racialization subjects them to extreme market insecurity with very few state supports to compensate. He draws a comparison to the explosion in the penal population in the U.S. to British workhouses, those Victorian institutions which penalized the poor:

> Much like the ‘long sixteenth century’ saw the birth of the modern Leviathan in Western Europe (Ertman 1997), including the invention of poor relief and the penal prison, as part of the rocky transition from feudalism to mercantilist capitalism, our own century’s turn has witnessed the fashioning of a novel kind of state that purports to enshrine markets and embrace liberty, but in reality reserves liberalism and its benefits for those at the top while it enforces punitive paternalism upon those at the bottom. Instead of viewing the police, the court, and the prison as technical appendages for fighting crime, we must recognise that they constitute core political capacities through which the Leviathan governs physical space, cuts up social space, dramatises symbolic divisions and stages sovereignty. (Wacquant 2012:76)

State criminal justice activities designed to racially order social space and cement symbolic divisions translate into crushing lived experiences of marginalization, impoverishment and violence for people of color in the U.S.  While it is out of the order of the structure of Wacquant's article, a passage from an earlier section explains his theory behind why public officials peruse prisonfare as part of the neoliberal state.  Paradoxically, prisonfare is intended to bolster the failing legitimacy of those very same elites as they abandon the public services and welfare policies touted as the justification for government administration after World War II:

>putting the marginalised fractions of the postindustrial working class under stern tutelage guided by moral behaviourism offers a prime theatrical stage onto which governing elites can project the authority of the state and shore up the deficit of legitimacy they suffer whenever they forsake its established missions of social and economic protection (Wacquant 2012:67)

That is the "law and order" planks of both political parties signal to a majority white population a crisis authorizing militarized policing and ballooning prison system.  Establishing a problem of their own making, political elites alternate between devising laws and regulations which enshrine marginalization of people of color and righteously taking to the bully pulpit to fight what they deem to be the scourges of lawlessness which elites instigated .  With these imperatives they reinforce the sovereignty of the state at the heart of all those square feet of prisons.

A history of racism in the U.S. is important to understanding this.  So is understanding that history is entangled

To understand institutional racism requires an understanding of American history.  Wacquant's critique reminds us that history is incomplete without an understanding of the neoliberal project as an ongoing, active creation in the present day.  Prisonfare stands next to education and housing policies as part of the broader scope of institutional racism within which policing has recently come to national attention.  As a composite, they form a devastating set of realities for people of color, and require attending to each, even as the subject of institutional racism in policing gains its deserved attention.

